---
title: OSGi Runtime
layout: tutorial
lprev: 360-provider-junit
lnext: 400-command
summary: How to create an OSGi Runtime
---

## What You Will Learn in This Section

In this section we start by defining a _runtime_ environment. An OSGi runtime
environment consists of a classpath, a framework, and a number of configuration
properties that properly setup the framework. In contrast with the application
server model, the runtime is unique for the application. In this section
we show how to create an executable JAR that contains all the dependencies.

Running a framework requires _assembling_ the application. Assembly consists of
selecting an appropriate set of bundles and defining the framework's context.

This requires to select the _initial requirements_ of a runtime and then let bnd 
resolve this into a set of _run bundles_. Once we have got this set of run bundles
we can export it into an executable JAR or other format.

Make sure you are in the top directory:

	$ cd ~/workspaces/osgi.enroute.examples.eval
{: .shell }


## The POM

In the `osgi.enroute.examples.eval` directory we create the `pom.xml` file in a new
`bndrun` directory.

	osgi.enroute.examples.eval $ mkdir bndrun
	osgi.enroute.examples.eval $ cd bndrun
	bndrun $ vi pom.xml
	// add the following file
{: .shell }

	<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
		xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
		<modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
	
		<parent>
			<groupId>org.osgi</groupId>
			<artifactId>osgi.enroute.examples.eval</artifactId>
			<version>1.0.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
		</parent>
	
		<artifactId>osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun</artifactId>
	
		<packaging>jar</packaging>

We will define the OSGi runtime environment in a `bndrun` file. This file contains
the myriad of details that is needed to define an OSGi runtime. Details like the
class path, the set of bundles, system properties, framework configuration, etc. We
will use the `bnd-export-maven-plugin`. This plugin will take a bndrun file as input
and then generate an executable JAR. This is a JAR that contains all its dependencies.

		<build>
			<plugins>
				<plugin>

We're using the 3.4.0-SNAPSHOT revision because this tutorial needed a newer feature that missed 3.3
{: .note }
					<groupId>biz.aQute.bnd</groupId>
					<artifactId>bnd-export-maven-plugin</artifactId>
					<version>3.4.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
					
We need to configure the plugin. 

					<configuration>
						<resolve>true</resolve>
						<bndruns>

Here we specify one or more bndrun files. We'll discuss the format of this file later.

							<bndrun>osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun</bndrun>
						</bndruns>
						<targetDir>.</targetDir>
					</configuration>
					<executions>
						<execution>
							<goals>
								<goal>export</goal>
							</goals>
						</execution>
					</executions>
				</plugin>
			</plugins>
		</build>


We need to add our provider as a runtime dependency:

		<dependencies>
			<dependency>
				<groupId>org.osgi</groupId>
				<artifactId>osgi.enroute.examples.eval.simple.provider</artifactId>
				<version>1.0.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
			</dependency>
			
We also need a _distro_. So far we've been compiling against API only with the OSGi enRoute base
API. However, we now need to add implementations. Implementations can come from different sources. For
example IBM websphere, Karaf, Knopflerfish, Apache Felix, etc. However, the OSGi enRoute project
has created a distro that consists of many different open source projects to demonstrate
the interoperability of OSGi.
			
			<dependency>
				<groupId>org.osgi</groupId>
				<artifactId>osgi.enroute.pom.distro</artifactId>
				<version>2.0.0</version>
			</dependency>

		</dependencies>
	</project>

We must also add bndrun as module in the parent pom.xml, e.g. after the existing api and simple.provider modules.

## The bndrun file

The `osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun` bndrun file contains a specification of an
OSGi runtime. An OSGi runtime needs quite a bit of information and we collect that
all in this file.

	bndrun $ vi osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun
	// add the following file
{: .shell }

The `-standalone` instruction is there to indicate that this does not run in bndtools
but as a stand-alone definition. 
	
	-standalone: 

We need access to all the dependencies of this project. The bndrun file supports this
with the Bnd Pom Repository. We then need to define the list of snapshot URLs and 
release URLs.

	-plugin.examples.eval = \
		aQute.bnd.repository.maven.pom.provider.BndPomRepository; \
			snapshotUrls=https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/osgi/; \
			releaseUrls=https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/; \
			pom=${.}/pom.xml; \
			name=examples.eval; \
			location=${.}/target/cached.xml
	
In the `-runrequires` section we list OSGi requirements that we want our runtime
to have. In the initial case we only need the provider to run. The syntax for
the `-runrequires` is the syntax for an OSGi _requirement_, as used in the
OSGi Require-Capability header. Each clause consists of a _namespace_ and a 
_filter_. The namespace defines a number of properties and the filter is an assertion
on these properties. In this case we use the identity namespace to require a specific
bundle, the provider bundle. The property name is `osgi.identity` following the
convention for namespaces and the Bundle Symbolic Name is `osgi.enroute.examples.eval.simple.provider`.
	
	-runrequires: 	\
		osgi.identity; \
			filter:='(osgi.identity=osgi.enroute.examples.eval.simple.provider)'

The `-runfw` specifies the framework we want to use. 
	
	-runfw: 		org.eclipse.osgi;version='[3.10.100.v20150529-1857,3.10.100.v20150529-1857]'

We can control the logging information during launching. Let's keep this off for now:
	
	-runtrace: 		false

In the example we use Equinox and equinox has a number of habits that need to be unlearned.
For example, it has a built-in shell but it is better to define the used shell 
using standard OSGi techniques. These settings will not be further explained here.

	#
	# OSGi enRoute setting. These settings
	# fixup some of the issues around equinox 
	# defaults.
	#
	
	-runee: 						JavaSE-1.8
	-resolve.effective:				resolve, active
	
	-runproperties.eqnx: 				\
		osgi.console.enable.builtin=false, \
		osgi.console=, \
		org.osgi.service.http.port=8080
	
	-runpath.eqnx: 					osgi.enroute.equinox.log.adapter
	-runrequires.eqnx: \
		osgi.identity;filter:='(osgi.identity=org.apache.felix.log)'
	
	-runsystempackages.eqnx:		javax.script
	-runsystemcapabilities.dflt: 	${native_capability}

## How to get the -runbundles

The definition so far cannot be run. We need to _resolve_ the bndrun file. Resolving
will take the `-runrequires` and the repository and calculate a _closure_ of bundles.
This closure then is the list of `-runbundles` that we need in our runtime.

We can resolve the requirements from Maven and get the list of bundles by running a `mvn install`
in this project. This will attempt to resolve the initial requirements and calculate the 
list of bundles. If the list differs from the `-runbundles` setting then the install will 
fail but it will give the list of calculated bundles:

	bndrun $ mvn install
	...
	
	-runbundles: \
		org.apache.felix.configadmin; version='[1.8.8,1.8.9)',\
		org.apache.felix.log; version='[1.0.1,1.0.2)',\
		org.apache.felix.scr; version='[2.0.2,2.0.3)',\
		org.eclipse.equinox.metatype; version='[1.4.100,1.4.101)',\
		org.osgi.service.metatype; version='[1.3.0,1.3.1)',\
		osgi.enroute.examples.eval.simple.provider; version='[1.0.0,1.0.1)'
	
	[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
	[INFO] BUILD FAILURE
	...
	[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
{: .shell }	

You can now copy this list and paste it into the `osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun`
file at the end. Make sure there is only one (1) `-runbundles` instruction in the bndrun file.

NOTE: You can add <failOnChanges>false</failOnChanges> inside bnd-export-maven-plugin configurations if you wish the update is done automatically.

If we now run maven again we succeed and a JAR file is created in the project directory.

	bndrun $ vi osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun
	// add/replace the -runbundles
	bndrun $ mvn install
	...
	bndrun $ ls
	osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun	pom.xml					target
	osgi.enroute.examples.eval.jar		src
 {: .shell }
 
## Running

We can now run the application as follows:

	bndrun $ java -version
	java version "1.8.0_25"
	Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 1.8.0_25-b17)
	Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM (build 25.25-b02, mixed mode)
	bndrun $ java -jar osgi.enroute.examples.eval.jar
	

The output is a little embarrassing ...

Though rather disappointing, it does make sense since we've not created any bundle that
does something that is visual to us. So the lack of output is understandable.

You can use Control-C to quit the application.

## Tracing

Since we do not see any output it would be nice to know if the launching was ok.
We can set the `-runtrace` instruction to `true` in the `osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun` 
file to see the launching progress:

	-runtrace: true

If we build and run the application, we see the following:

	bndrun $ vi osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun
	// set -runtrace: true
	bndrun $ mvn install
	...
	bndrun $ java -jar osgi.enroute.examples.eval.jar
	# properties {launch.name=bndrun, osgi.console=, launch.noreferences=false, ...
	...	
	Id    State Modified      Location
	0     ACTIV <>            System Bundle
	1     ACTIV <>            jar/org.apache.felix.configadmin-1.8.8.jar
	2     ACTIV <>            jar/org.apache.felix.log-1.0.1.jar
	3     ACTIV <>            jar/org.apache.felix.scr-2.0.2.jar
	4     ACTIV <>            jar/org.eclipse.equinox.metatype-1.4.100.v20150408-1437.jar
	5     ACTIV <>            jar/org.osgi.service.metatype-1.3.0.jar
	6     ACTIV <>            jar/osgi.enroute.examples.eval.provider-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar
	# framework=org.eclipse.osgi.launch.Equinox@7c0e2abd
	# registered launcher with arguments for syncing
	# will wait for a registered Runnable
	
The output is quite extensive. If you have problems during the launch it is a great help 
and including this information with a bug report is highly appreciated.

## The Gogo Shell

What we're missing is a shell to see the inner bowels of our runtime. The most
popular shell in OSGi is the Gogo shell. We can add this shell by adding it as 
an initial run requirement in the `osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun` file:

	-runrequires: \
		osgi.identity;filter:='(osgi.identity=osgi.enroute.examples.eval.simple.provider)',\
		osgi.identity;filter:='(osgi.identity=osgi.enroute.gogo.shell.provider)'

You probably also want to set `-runtrace` to `false` to minimize the output. We
will now get a shell; as long as the shell works we can assume the launch was
ok.

We now need to resolve the bndrun file. We run `mvn install` which will fail
because the new list of bundles does not match the current list of bundles. We
then copy the `-runbundles` into the  `osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun` file by
replacing the existing list. (Make sure you do not get more than 1 `-runbundles`
instruction in the file.)

	bndrun $ vi osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun
	// add the -runrequires for Gogo
	bndrun $ mvn install
	....
	-runbundles: \
		org.apache.felix.configadmin; version='[1.8.8,1.8.9)',\
		org.apache.felix.gogo.runtime; version='[0.16.2,0.16.3)',\
		org.apache.felix.log; version='[1.0.1,1.0.2)',\
		org.apache.felix.scr; version='[2.0.2,2.0.3)',\
		org.eclipse.equinox.metatype; version='[1.4.100,1.4.101)',\
		org.osgi.service.metatype; version='[1.3.0,1.3.1)',\
		osgi.enroute.examples.eval.provider; version='[1.0.0,1.0.1)',\
		osgi.enroute.gogo.shell.provider; version='[2.0.0,2.0.1)'
	....
	[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
	[INFO] BUILD FAILURE
	[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
	bndrun $ vi osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun
	// copy the -runbundles from the output of mvn into the file
	// replacing the existing -runbundles 
	bndrun $ mvn install
	...
	[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
	[INFO] BUILD SUCCESS
	[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
	bndrun $ java -jar osgi.enroute.examples.eval.jar 
	             ____             _       
	   ___ _ __ |  _ \ ___  _   _| |_ ___ 
	  / _ \ '_ \| |_) / _ \| | | | __/ _ \
	 |  __/ | | |  _ < (_) | |_| | |_  __/
	  \___|_| |_|_| \_\___/ \__,_|\__\___|
	              http://enroute.osgi.org/
	              
	G! 
{: .shell }

Gogo has many commands. You can find an introduction at the [Gogo App Note](http://enroute.osgi.org/appnotes/gogo.html).

For example:
	
	G! bundles
	0|Active     |    0|org.eclipse.osgi (3.10.100.v20150529-1857)
    1|Active     |    1|org.apache.felix.configadmin (1.8.8)
    2|Active     |    1|org.apache.felix.gogo.runtime (0.16.2)
    3|Active     |    1|org.apache.felix.log (1.0.1)
    4|Active     |    1|org.apache.felix.scr (2.0.2)
    5|Active     |    1|org.eclipse.equinox.metatype (1.4.100.v20150408-1437)
    6|Active     |    1|org.osgi.service.metatype (1.3.0.201505202024)
    7|Active     |    1|osgi.enroute.examples.eval.provider (1.0.0.201610030911)
    8|Active     |    1|osgi.enroute.gogo.shell.provider (2.0.0.201608121439-SNAPSHOT)
	G! 
{: .shell }
	
# User Friendly Commands

What we're running is the base core primitive simple Gogo shell. This means it can run 
the commands that are on the Bundle Context (that is `bundles` command is mapped
to `BundleContext.getBundles()`) but there are now user friendly commands. A number
of such commands are implemented in the `org.apache.felix.gogo.command` bundle. So we
could add this bundle to the `-runrequires` instruction:

	-runrequires: \
		osgi.identity;filter:='(osgi.identity=osgi.enroute.examples.eval.simple.provider)',\
		osgi.identity;filter:='(osgi.identity=osgi.enroute.gogo.shell.provider)',\
		osgi.identity;filter:='(osgi.identity=org.apache.felix.gogo.command)'

So now you can resolve again and then we can run `help` in the Gogo shell:


	bndrun $ vi osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun
	// replace the -runrequires
	bndrun $ mvn install
	...
	
	-runbundles: ...
	...
	bndrun $ vi osgi.enroute.examples.eval.bndrun
	// replace -runbundles
	bndrun $ java -jar osgi.enroute.examples.eval.jar 
	             ____             _       
	   ___ _ __ |  _ \ ___  _   _| |_ ___ 
	  / _ \ '_ \| |_) / _ \| | | | __/ _ \
	 |  __/ | | |  _ < (_) | |_| | |_  __/
	  \___|_| |_|_| \_\___/ \__,_|\__\___|
	              http://enroute.osgi.org/
	
	              
	G! help
	felix:bundlelevel
	felix:cd
	felix:frameworklevel
	felix:headers
	...
	scr:config
	scr:disable
	scr:enable
	scr:info
	scr:list
	G! 
{: .shell }

## What did We Learn?

In this section we've created a bndrun file to create an OSGi runtime. We then
learned how to add requirements to the file and resolve it so we get the `-runbundles`.
We then learned how to add these `-runbundles` to the bndrun file so they can
be exported into an executable jar.

We then executed this JAR and added a Gogo shell.

 
